# Welcome Back! 

## Day 2 [##________]

## Getting into your VMs

- https://class.hypertheory-labs.com
- Login
- Let me know if you have any trouble
- Please start Docker Desktop

## Yesterday

- HTTP
    - Http methods
        - GET
        - POST
        - PUT
        - DELETE
        - OPTIONS
        - HEAD
    - ROA (Resource Oriented Architecture)
        - Resource is an *important thingy* you want to expose to other software.
            - e.g. Employees, an employee, a show, a list of shows, etc.
            - identified by a URL (Uniform resource locator) (https://localhost:1337/shows/398398983)
            - (https | https) - scheme
            - localhost (or api.company.com, whatever) is known as the "origin", or "authority" (or just server)
            - 1337 - the TCP port the HTTP server is running on (if this was 443, you wouldn't have to specify it, (http uses 80 by default https uses 443))
        - Resources can have subordinate resources (employees resource might have a bunch of "subordinate" employee resources)
            - `/employees`, `/employees/x9999`, `/employees/x9999/manager` 
    - Status Codes (dogs and cats)
        - 200-299 - Success Status Codes - it worked, and maybe some nuance.
        - 300-399 - Usually we use these for redirects (these are not the droids you are looking for)
        - 400-499 - The client (user-agent) made a bad request.
        - 500-599 - Server errors. We want to avoid these. They are our fault (code, network, hardware, etc.)

- Types
    - UUID (.NET calls these GUIDs) - 2^128 psuedo-random number, used to identify things with low chance of collission. (so, unique). 
    - bonus material - since they are random, they are not good to use on a clustered index in a database. other version (v7) are still random, but generate in a sortable order for that machine.

- Databases in general
    - Different kinds
        - Relational
            - DB2, SQL Server, Oracle, MySql, Sqlite, Postgres
            - Rows and Columns - has a predefined schema
            - Reporting or they are good for writes (transactional)
            - SOLID - really work well, known, ACID compliant, etc. The world runs on these.
        - Document - (NoSql - no schema, )
            - MongoDb
            - Hybrid: Postgres, SqlServer (latest version)
        - KV
            - Redis, localStorage sessionStorage (webstorage)
            - unstructured, here's a key, and here's a value - no querying, etc.
            - great for caches
            - example: "favorite-colors.jeff": "blue"
        - Graph - ... 
        - Vector - uses algorithms to put similar data "close" to each other. 
            - "embeddings", "centroids", etc.
            - llms use this stuff a lot, and kind of *are* this at some level.
- Developer Testing
    - Databases (breaking, failing, changing under your feet, etc.)
    - Categories
        - Unit
        - Unit Integration
        - System Tests
        - System Integration Tests*
- Environments
    - Twelve Factor App: Config lives in environments
    - Pipelines
        - Integration (CI) - all the developers have to agree at some point. Should verify it meets the requirements to the confidence of the team. (tests, builds, etc.)
        - Delivery (CD) - your application creates an "artifact" and pipeline publishes it.
        - Deployment (CD) - same, but actually get it running somewhere (a test environment, staging, etc.)
    - Aspire
        - A microsoft tool to make development in the "twelve factor app" world easier.
        - It is sort of a replacement for managing docker compose files, environment variables, all that.
        - promotes good practices (pushes you into the pit of success)
        - does not have to be used, and is not just for .NET stuff - node, go, java, whatever.
        - Can publish - actually push your stuff to a pipeline that also CDs it into Azure, AWS, Kubernetes, etc. (we aren't covering this.)
        - One of the most important thigs is observability - you, the developer, NEED to be able
          to see "inside" your app as it is running (in any environment, including production)
          This is open telemetry - Logs, Traces, Metrics
        - Many companies have tools for collecting this data in environments like QA, staging, production
            - Prometheus, Grafana, Splunk, etc.
        - Aspire lets you see this while you are developing without all those tools.
    - Containers (Docker, Docker Compose, Docker Swarm, Orchestration, Etc.)
        - A way to safely run software on your machine in such a way that other software on your machine won't be impacted by it. (it is "contained")
## Today

- Finish The Api
- Create a Client
- C# / OOP / Unit Testing / TDD
- First Practice!



## HTTP Stuff

```
GET /employees/x9999


200 Ok
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "id": "x9999",
    "name": "Jeff", 
    "department": "DEV",
    "staff": [
        { "id": "x0333", "name": "Henry", "department": "QA"}
    ]
}

```

```
GET /employees/x9999/manager

200 Ok
Content-Type: application/json
Cache-Control: public, indempotent, max-age=36

{
    "id": "x0001",
    "name": "Sue",
    "deparment": "CEO"
}


GET /employees/x0001

GET /employees/x0001/staff

```



## Part of the environment your service runs in will need you to configure things in your API

- OTEL (Open Telemetry) - Where do we log things? How is telemetry collected, etc. 
- Health Checks - standard endpoints on your API that other services can use to make sure your api is running, healthy, able to accept requests, etc.
- SRE - "Site Reliability Engineering", so stuff like timeouts, retries, circuit breakers, etc.