# Welcome Back! 

## Day 2 [#_________]

## Getting into your VMs

- https://class.hypertheory-labs.com
- Login
- Let me know if you have any trouble

## Yesterday

- Services
    - Definition: Some code that encapsulates some data, and provides ways for that data to be manipulated according to the "rules" of that service.
    - "OOP to me means only messaging, local retention and protection and hiding of state-process, and extreme LateBinding of all things" - Alan Kay
        - The implementation of code will change WAY more frequently than the interface (contract, etc.) - the way other code interacts with it.
    - Service Architectures
        - Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) - primary architecture here. 
    - Monolith - not *really* a thing, but the idea that the companies entire code can be in one shared code base that all the developers work 
    within.
    - "Modular Monolith" - a push back against microservices, it says basically 'build a monolith because they are awesome, but divide the monolith into responsibility areas (modules) that *could* be extracted to their own service if you need it'"
    - Microservice
        - Netflix: 2 weeks big. 
        - Small enough to fit in your head
        - "SOA Done Right"
        - Independently deployable (any time, no coordination or worry)
    - "Apps" - the thing a team controls, which is a repository. Deployed together, tested together, etc. 
- .NET (DotNet)
    - 2002 - .NET 1.0
    - Was windows only for a long time. .NET "Core" is cross platform (Windows, Mac, Linux, various process architectures, etc)
        - it is a "subset" of "old skool" .NET - doesn't have everything (no WCF for example, no "Windows Workflow", weird stuff like that)
        - All modern .NET development should probably be done with .NET Core.
    


## Today

- Build that API
- HTTP
- Backing Services
- Environments
